Robredo asks Bicolanos: Do for Otso Diretso what you did for me in 2016;Read more#TheLeaderIWant#PHVote will be with you every step of the way – arming you with the information you need to choose your candidates.
Vice President Leni Robredo recalls her own come-from-behind victory in 2016 and urges her fellow Bicolanos to vote for the opposition senatorial candidates in 2019    OTSO DIRETSO. Vice President Leni Robredo joins the Otso Diretso slate as it officially kicks off its campaign for the 2019 senatorial elections in Naga City on February 13, 2019. Photo from the Office of the Vice President CAMARINES SUR, Philippines – When Vice President Leni Robredo raised the hands of the Otso Diretso senatorial bets onstage on Wednesday evening, February 13, it started raining.But the thousands who gathered at Plaza Quezon in Naga City for the slate's grand proclamation rally stayed put. The city, after all, is the bailiwick of the Vice President.Robredo urged her fellow Bicolanos to help her campaign for Otso Diretso, most of whom are lagging behind in preelection surveys. (READ: Otso Diretso bets to Iriganons: 'Our fight is also De Lima's fight')The Vice President said that even if the Otso Diretso bets are mostly unknown, she can vouch for their track records. (READ: Otso Diretso slate offers 8-point platform)"'Yung 8 nilalapit ko sa inyo. Hindi lang ako humihingi na [iboto] 'nyo sila. Pero 'yung hinihingi ko, tulungan 'nyo akong ikampanya sila," said Robredo.(I'm presenting the 8 to you. I'm not just asking you to vote for them. But what I'm asking for is, help me campaign for them.)"Alam 'nyo po na 'di namin ilalapit sa inyo kung 'di kami naniniwala sa kanila," she added.(You know I wouldn't present them to you if I didn’t believe in them.)She recalled her own come-from-behind victory in the 2016 vice presidential race. Robredo said she owes part of her electoral win to her home province Camarines Sur, where she edged out her opponents with 664,190 votes.In 2016, the tandem of Robredo and Liberal Party standard-bearer Mar Roxas – now an Otso Diretso senatorial bet – was victorious in Camarines Sur. Like Robredo, Roxas beat his opponents then with 305,670 votes.In Naga City, Robredo had garnered 88.8% of the votes or 60,597 votes, while Roxas got 56.1% in the presidential race with 38,144 votes.Robredo hopes Bicolanos would repeat the same thing for Otso Diretso in May. (READ: Can Otso Diretso do a repeat of Robredo's 2016 victory?)"Kung titignan natin ‘yung resulta ng vice presidential elections, nakapalaki ng binigay 'nyong boto sa akin. Ibinigay sa akin ng Naga, ibinigay sa akin ng Camarines Sur, ibinigay sa akin ng Bicol region – kaya tayo nagtagumpay. Sana 'yung ibinigay sa akin, 'yun din 'yung ibibigay sa kanilang 8," said the Vice President.(If you look at the results of the vice presidential elections, you gave me so many votes. Naga gave their vote for me, Camarines Sur gave their vote for me, Bicol gave their vote for me – that's why I won. I hope what you gave me, you will also give to the 8.)While Robredo secured the vice presidency, Roxas had to settle for second place to then-Davao City mayor and now President Rodrigo Duterte. (READ: Roxas on Senate bid: 'I'm not here to redo 2016')APPEAL TO VOTERS. Vice President Leni Robredo calls on Bicolanos to vote for Otso Diretso senatorial candidates. Photo from the Office of the Vice President Robredo's blessingAside from Roxas, there are 7 other candidates in Otso Diretso. They are Magdalo Representative Gary Alejano, reelectionist Senator Bam Aquino, human rights lawyer Chel Diokno, Marawi civic leader Samira Gutoc, ex-solicitor general Florin Hilbay, election lawyer Romy Macalintal, and ex-Quezon congressman Erin Tañada.In her speech, Robredo said Roxas has become a "second father" to her 3 daughters after the tragic death of her husband, the late interior secretary Jesse Robredo, in a plane crash in 2012.She shared that Roxas even took the Robredo siblings to a concert they wanted to watch before."Alam 'nyo po na matalik na magkaibigan si Sec Mar and Sec Jesse. No’ng namatay si Jess, madalas si Sec Mar na kinakamusta ang aking mga anak," said Robredo.(You know that Sec Mar and Sec Jesse were good friends. When Jess died, Sec Mar would always check up on my children.)The Vice President then said Naga has much love to offer to Aquino, who was her campaign manager in the 2016 polls."Alam ko po mahal na mahal 'nyo din si Senator Bam Aquino. Hindi lang dahil napakadalas niya dito.... Pero no'ng napalaban po ako ng 2016, si Senator Bam 'yung nabiktima ko [para maging campaign manager]," Robredo said.(I know that you also love Senator Bam Aquino. This is not just because he goes here often.... But when I ended up running in 2016, Senator Bam was the one I victimized to be my campaign manager.)Robredo also spoke fondly of Macalintal, who is her lead legal counsel in the electoral protest filed against her by defeated vice presidential bet Ferdinand "Bongbong" Marcos Jr."'Pag nagpainterview na si Romy Mac, kampante na ang aking mga kababayan [tungkol sa kaso ko]," said Robredo.(When Romy Mac gets interviewed, my province mates' worries about my case are eased.)She then gave quick praises for the remaining members of the slate.The Vice President said Alejano is "napakahusay, hindi lang napakahusay na sundalo pero napakahusay na tao (excellent, not just an excellent soldier but an excellent person).""Solid ang paninindigan (A man of solid principles)" was how Robredo described Tañada.As for Hilbay, Robredo said his rags-to-riches story as a Tondo boy who became solicitor general is "napaka-inspiring (very inspiring)."As for Gutoc, Robredo said the mother from war-torn Marawi City has a lot of kababayans (town mates) in Naga, which welcomed those displaced by the Marawi siege.Robredo endorsed Diokno last and took a swipe against the sister of Bongbong, Ilocos Norte Governor Imee Marcos, with whom Diokno faced off in GMA News' recent senatorial debate."Napanood 'nyo ba 'yung debate? Napaka-lodi!... Natameme ata 'yung kanyang naka-one on one. 'Di ko na sasabihin kung sino," said Robredo.(Did you watch the debate? He is such an idol!... The person he had a one-on-one with wasn't even able to clap back at him. I won't say who she is.) – Rappler.comDaraga Mayor Carlwyn Baldo discharged from hospital, back in jail;Read more
(UPDATED) The mayor is transferred back to his detention cell in Legazpi City, Albay    DISCHARGED. Daraga Mayor Carlwyn Baldo is discharged from the University of Santo Tomas Hospital in Legazpi City on Monday night, February 4. Photo by Rhaydz Barcia/Rappler MANILA, Philippines (UPDATED) – Daraga Mayor Carlwyn Baldo, the alleged mastermind in the killing of AKO Bicol Representative Rodel Batocabe, was discharged from the University of Santo Tomas Hospital in Legazpi City on Monday night, February 4.Baldo, who was arrested on January 22 for illegal possession of firearms, was transferred back to his detention cell in Legazpi City, Albay.He was rushed to the hospital on January 22, just hours after he was arrested. Bicol police Criminal Investigation and Detection Group chief Senior Superintendent Arnold Ardiente said Baldo suffered an asthma attack. He did not disclose any history of asthma attacks during his booking procedure for detention.Discharge orderLawyer Merito Lovenzky Fernandez, head of Mayor Baldo’s legal team, said his client opted to go out from UST Legazpi Hospital despite his health status after a high ranking official – who turned out to be Ardiente –ordered the transfer of Baldo to Camp Crame PNP hospital in Manila.Prior to Baldo’s discharge, Ardiente admitted telling Baldo on Monday morning that he would be transferred to the PNP hospital in Camp Crame.“He is under our custody so supposedly he must be in our PNP hospital. But the attending physician issued a discharge order, meaning he is safe to back to jail,” Ardiente said. Ardiente added the PNP did not compel Baldo’s attending physician to issue a discharge order.Fernandez meanwhile said CIDG officials asked Baldo to choose whether to go to the city jail or be brought to PNP hospital at Camp Crame in Manila.“There is no order of discharge from his physician this morning but the information I’ve got is that the CIDG wants mayor Baldo to be put up behind bars at Legazpi City jail. Mayor Baldo was told to choose if he wants to go back to Legazpi City jail or to bring him at Camp Crame PNP hospital in Manila,” Fernandez said.Baldo’s legal team, led by Fernandez, opposed the move for fear of his client’s safety and security during transit in Manila.“There is a risk, for security reasons, I cannot advise and will not allow that to happen because anything can happen during the transit,” he said.The alleged hitman in Batocabe's killing tagged Baldo as the mastermind of the crime. Batocabe was running for Daraga mayor in the May elections against reelectionist Baldo.The mayor has maintained his innocence in the case. – with reports from Rhaydz Barcia/Rappler.comBaldo behind bars is still Daraga mayor – DILG Bicol;Read more
The DILG will have to meet with the Comelec after Mayor Baldo's inquest proceedings, and determine if he no longer has the capacity to govern     NO POLICE POWERS. Daraga Mayor Carlwyn Baldo no longer has control over their local police. File photo by Rhaydz Barcia/Rappler ALBAY, Philippines – Carlwyn Baldo will continue to function as mayor of Daraga, Albay, even while in detention, pending inquest into charges against him and, after that, the decision of the Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG) and the Commission on Elections (Comelec).  Multiple murder charges were filed against Baldo last week for allegedly masterminding the killing last December of party-list congressman Rodel Batocabe and the latter's police escort. Batocabe was running against Baldo in the 2019 mayoral race.On Tuesday, January 22, however, during a police raid on his compound, Baldo was found in possession of unlicensed firearms, thus the arrest. Inquest should be done within 36 hours after his arrest, but this has yet to happen because the local chief executive was rushed to the hospital on Wednesday due to an asthma attack “Mayor Carlwyn Baldo will remain as chief executive of Daraga while we are waiting for inquest proceeding,” Anthony Nuyda, DILG Bicol regional director, said on Wednesday, January 23. “Usually [in cases like this] the vice mayor will succeed the mayor, but because Daraga is under Comelec control, we will wait for the Commission on Elections' decision. The Comelec needs to convene to discuss this matter,” Nuyda said in an interview.Lawyer Maria Juana Valeza of Comelec Bicol said, like DILG's Nuyda, that Baldo would remain mayor pending inquest proceedings.From his quarters inside the Criminal Investigation and Detection Group (CIDG) office in Bicol, Baldo was brought to the University of Santo Tomas Hospital in Legazpi City, and has not been released. The CIDG in Manila told Rappler that it would be up to the DILG to declare if Baldo is incapacitated to govern as mayor.While in the hospital on Wednesday, the mayor was posted to his Facebook page, reminding personnel of the local government unit to go about their work as usual. “On the basis of one of my constitutional rights, presumption of innocence as suspect for violation of RA 10591, I am directing all department heads, chief of offices, and other personnel of LGU-Daraga to perform their respective office functions normally,” he said.“Maski ayo kita iarampangang na kadifisilan, padagos man po gilayon an serbisyo dangan trabaho sa municipyo san Daraga para saynyo ngamin,” Baldo said. (Even though we are facing difficulty, our work in the municipal office will continue to serve the people of Daraga.)On Wednesday, members of the Special Investigation Task Group Batocabe recovered one caliber .45 pistol allegedly used in the shooting of Batocabe and his police escort.The gun was recovered at the fishpond in Purok 3, Barangay Busay, Ligao City, Albay.Maria Luisa Calubaquib, regional police spokesperson, said members of the task force working on the Batocabe case recovered the pistol, with 10 live ammunition, supposedly one of the two firearms used by hitman Henry Yuson on the congressman.The firearm was submitted for ballistic and cross-matching examination. – Rappler.com Salaries of Bicol rural nurses unpaid the past two months;Read more
Health officials in the region say this 'might also be the real picture across the country' following issues with the enactment of the 2019 national budget    Image from Shutterstock LEGAZPI CITY, Philippines – Public health nurses assigned to far-flung villages and rural health units across the Bicol region have yet to receive their salary following the delayed release of funds from the Department of Budget and Management (DBM).Jimbo Guerrero, an official of Department of Health (DOH)-Bicol, said nurses who are part of the Nurse Deployment Program (NDP) have not received their salaries for two months now. The delayed release of salaries has effectively turned the nurses to working as volunteers.  The NDP is DOH's program in rural communities and local government units providing medical services and ensure good health and welfare of the people."Because of this problem, our [acting] director [Ernie Vera] issued a memo to hold in abeyance the hiring and deployment of human resources for health effective January 16, 2019, until they receive the money for the first quarter of 2019 from DBM," Guerrero told Rappler."We will give updates on the lifting of this notice as the situation progresses," Vera said in his memorandum. According to DOH officials here, the problem in Bicol might also be the real picture across the country following the slow release of the budget, pending the passage of the 2019 national budget. – Rappler.comRonald Ang takes oath as AKO Bicol congressman;Read more
He replaces slain AKO Bicol representative Rodel Batocabe at the House of Representatives    OATH-TAKING. Ronald Ang takes his oath as new AKO Bicol representative before Speaker Gloria Macapagal Arroyo. Screenshot from the House's YouTube account OATH-TAKING. Ronald Ang takes his oath as new AKO Bicol representative before Speaker Gloria Macapagal Arroyo. Screenshot from the House's YouTube account MANILA, Philippines – Ronald Ang has replaced slain congressman Rodel Batocabe as AKO Bico ,representative in the House.Ang, the fourth nominee of the party list, took his oath as party-list representative on Wednesday, January 16.Speaker Gloria Macapagal Arroyo administered the oath to Ang, who was joined by his family and AKO Bicol Representative Alfredo Garbin Jr during the ceremony.Ang replaced Batocabe, who was killed in an ambush on December 22, 2018. Police said the gunmen were allegedly hired by one of Batocabe’s opponents in the 2019 polls, reelectionist Daraga Mayor Calywn Baldo.The House of Representatives held a memorial service for the slain congressman on Monday, January 14, where Batocabe’s closest friends and colleagues, his former law professor retired Supreme Court associate justice Vicente Mendoza, and Arroyo delivered eulogies. – Rappler.comSuspects in Batocabe murder surrender | Evening wRap;Read more
Watch the evening wRap with Chito de la Vega     Today on Rappler:Executive Producer / WriterLilibeth FrondosoAssociate Producer / PublisherMarga DeonaAnalette AbesamisMaster Editor / PlaybackEmerald HidalgoJaene ZaplanJaen ManegdegQuita ChuaticoInflation rate slows down to 5.1% in December | Midday wRap;Read more
Watch the midday wRap with Ralf Rivas     Today on Rappler:Executive Producer / WriterLilibeth FrondosoAssociate Producer / PublisherMarga DeonaAnalette AbesamisMaster Editor / PlaybackEmerald HidalgoJaene ZaplanJaen ManegdegQuita ChuaticoNDRRMC: At least 122 dead due to Tropical Depression Usman;Read more
(3rd UPDATE) The NDRRMC says 28 people are missing     RUINS. Houses were destroyed by the landslide in Barangay Sugod, Albay. Photo by Mavic Conde/Rappler MANILA, Philippines (3rd UPDATE) – The National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC) reported 122 deaths related to Tropical Depression Usman as of Thursday, January 3.In an updated report, the NDRRMC said it was still validating the recorded deaths in Mimaropa, Bicol region, and Eastern Visayas. The NDRMMC also reported that 28 people remained missing while some 60 others were injured. Earlier on Thursday, the Philippine National Police (PNP) in Bicol reported a total of 105 deaths in the region as of Thursday morning. A breakdown of the deaths in the region showed that most of the fatalities were in Camarines Sur, where heavy rains also triggered landslides:Areas in Albay and Camarines Sur were hit badly by landslides, and authorities had been retrieving more bodies from the areas as search and rescue operations continued.Assistance provided: In a statement Thursday, the Department of Social Welfare and Development said it would provide burial assistance to families of those killed in landslides and massive flooding in the Bicol region. The DSWD said medical assistance would also be given to those injured.The DSWD said social workers from its Bicol field office conducted interviews with survivors and victims' families to assess their needs. Psychosocial support and food and noon-food assistance were also given to affected residents in Usman-hit areas.The department said it gave assistance to affected residents in the following areas: Northern SamarDSWD Spokesperson Glenda Relova added that relief goods were also delivered to residents in isolated areas with the help of the Philippine Air Force.  The DSWD said a post-disaster evaluation will be done over the next few days to determine assistance needed for rehabilitation of residents. OCD Bicol Director Claudio Yucot earlier said many people failed to take necessary precautions because Usman was not strong enough to be rated as a typhoon by the Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical, and Astronomical Services Administration (PAGASA).Yucot also said on Wednesday that disaster officials had asked residents of two areas in Tiwi town in Albay to evacuate due to recently-discovered cracks in mountainous zones.He said that the Mines and Geonsciences Bureau (MGB) found big land cracks in the areas of Barangay Maynonong adjacent to Barangay Patitinan in Sagñay, Camarines Sur.The number of individuals affected by Usman also continued to rise as the NDRRMC said about 75,326 families or some 308,451 persons were affected as of Wednesday night.Of these families, 6,217 or about 30,906 individuals were in 210 evacuation centers. Another 10,844 families or 55,274 persons were being served outside as they stayed with relatives and friends.Flooding and damage to infrastructure and personal property prompted local officials to suspend classes in all levels in Camarines Sur and in the independent component city of Naga, on January 3 and 4. (READ: #WalangPasok: Class suspensions for January 3, 4)Usman left the Philippine Area of Responsibility (PAR) on Sunday, December 30. – Rappler.comResidents in 2 areas in Tiwi, Albay asked to leave due to land cracks;Read more
Evacuation is ordered for fear of landslides
LANDSLIDES. Firefighters carry a body buried in a landslide in Barangay Sugod in Tiwi, Albay on December 30, 2018. Photo by Mavic Conde/Rappler  LEGAZPI CITY, Philippines – Disaster officials in Bicol have asked residents of two areas in Tiwi town in Albay to evacuate due to recently-discovered cracks in mountainous zones.Claudio Yucot, chief of Bicol's Regional Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (RDRRMC), said on Wednesday, January 2, that residents in two areas in Barangay Maynonong in Tiwi should leave their houses for safety after the Mines and Geonsciences Bureau (MGB) discovered cracks in the area.Landslides across Bicol claimed dozens of lives as the death toll due to Tropical Depression Usman continues to rises.  Yucot said that the MGB found big land cracks in the areas of Barangay Maynonong adjacent to Barangay Patitinan in Sagñay, Camarines Sur. There were 24 reported fatalities in a landslide in Barangay Patitinan in Sagñay town.Social welfare regional director Arnel Garcia said 22,959 families or 108,615 people have been affected by Usman as of January 2. This number is from a total of 240 barangays across the region.There are currently 5,541 families or 28,025 people in evacuation centers. Garcia said 10,417 affected families, or 53,566 people, are coping outside evacuation camps.Classes in the provinces of Albay and Camarines Sur have been suspended, and will resume only on January 7.Bicol University has also suspended classes, and will resume on January 7 too. (READ: #WalangPasok: Class suspensions for January 3, 4) – Rappler.comSK official, residents of Usman-hit Albay towns seek aid;Read more
Bariis Sangguniang Kabataan Chairman Judy Ann Coderis is seeking help on behalf of affected residents who need potable water and food, medicine, clothing, and hygiene kits    JOROAN ELEMENTARY SCHOOL. The flow of water passes this street in Joroan, flooding this school and residential houses ALBAY, Philippines – A Sangguniang Kabataan (SK) official of Tiwi town in this province on Tuesday, January 1, requested help for her village – one of those severely affected in Usman-hit Bicol region.“The recent calamity has hit our barangay and caused destruction of properties and loss of lives due to landslides and unexpected floodings,” said Bariis SK Chairman Judy Ann Coderis.Coderis said she is seeking help on behalf of affected residents for help in meeting basic needs, including clean and potable water, food, clothing, medicine. and hygiene kits.“Many have lost their houses, properties, and even loved ones. Most of the houses were flooded and left with massive amount of mud. As of the moment, there are still 3 persons missing,” she added.According to carangay captain Jaime Convencido, at least 5 families from 16 washed-out households are staying at the barangay’s multi-purpose hall.Among them is John Onday, who tried to save some of their belongings but was unsuccessful.“I stayed home to secure our things while my parents and siblings took refuge in a safer place. But everything was ruined,” John said.Some found refuge in their relatives’ homes in Bariis.Thankful for any helpThe affected residents received their first relief goods Monday night, January 1, when the road was cleared.According to Shiela Magat-Basbas, a personality-and-skills-development teacher to some of the affected residents, the people are grateful for any help provided, especially food.“At least daw may pandagdag sila sa pagkain ngayon (At least they have additional food for today.),” she relayed. The search and retrieval operations for 3 missing persons started at 12 pm today, or 3 days since they went missing.Two days earlier, netizens called the attention of the Tiwi government for the lack of rescue teams in Bariis, where missing persons had beenreported.Elementary school teacher Joem Periña, a Bariis resident, took to Facebook to air his observations on the events.Periña wrote: “Wara pang nakakalaog na rescuers sa Bariis and Maynonong areas kun sain may reported na mga missing. Wara pang ayuda na nag aabot.... Habang naghahaloy, nagsasadit an pag-asa kan mga pamilya kaini na makua pang buhay an mga nawawara.”(There are still no rescuers in Bariis and Maynonong where there have been reported missing. There are no help [of any kind yet.] The longer the family of missing persons wait, the slimmer their chance of finding them alive.)Tiwi Vice Mayor David Beato said the delay was due to the road blockage. “The road beyond barangay Sugod was unpassable at the time, he said.Netizens suggested ways to get to the isolated villages. Periña suggested a boat ride.When Beato was asked about this, he said: “We have a Coast Guard stationed near a coastal area, waiting for direction. It’s up to the person in charge.”Coderis confirmed this. “We saw Coast Guards stationed somewhere near Sugod on our way to the town proper. But why they didn’t come to our barangay amidst our report for missing persons is also our question,” she said.Diverting the flood flowMeanwhile, in nearby Barangay Joroan, a known Albay pilgrim site, affected residents appealed to help to divert the flow of the flood away from their residential street.“Nagmeeting na ang aming barangay officials at kailangan namin ng magpapahiram ng machineries to do this (Our barangay officials have conducted a meeting, and they said we need the help of those with heavy equipment to do this),” according to a resident whose house was affected by the flood.“Puwede sana pansamantala sa palayan padaaanin kaysa dito sa residential area kaya lang ayaw ng may-ari  (This flood could be diverted to that rice field but the owner won't allow it),” said another resident, Levi Camacho. – Rappler.comBicol OCD: Tropical Depression Usman death toll climbs to 68;Read more
(UPDATED) The Office of Civil Defense -Bicol Region fears the number of fatalities will continue to increase    SEARCH AND RETRIEVAL. Police officers, fire brigades and volunteers help in the operation. Photo by Mavic Conde/Rappler MANILA, Philippines (UPDATED) – The death toll from Tropical Depression Usman climbed to 68 with the number of fatalities expected to increase higher, said the Office of Civil Defense Bicol Region Monday, December 31.Fifty-seven people died in the Bicol region, while 11 were killed in Samar, mostly due to landslides and drownings, the OCD officials said."I am afraid this (death toll) will still go up because there are a lot of areas we still have to clear," said Claudio Yucot, Bicol civil defense director.Earlier, the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC), said its record Sunday night, December 20, had 61 people dead, 18 people recorded missing and 12 others from Mimaropa, Bicol Region, and Eastern Visayas. They were also still validating reports Monday.Landslides had occurred in Albay on Saturday, December 29 and Friday, December 28, which left at least 12 dead as of Sunday.Apart from this, landslides were also reported in Nato town, Camarines Sur. Ten bodies were recovered in the area.Yucot said many people failed to take necessary precautions because Usman was not strong enough to be rated as a typhoon by Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical, and Astronomical Services Administration (PAGASA).."People were overconfident because they were on (Christmas) vacation mode and there was no tropical cyclone warning," Yucot told AFP.Although Usman has been downgraded into a low pressure and has since moved westward away from the country, many affected areas were still experiencing seasonal rains, hampering rescue and recovery efforts, he added.Bicol OCD counted 17 people still missing and more than 40,000 were displaced nationwide. In an updated report from the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) Disaster Response and Management Bureau (DRMB), 3,488 families or 13,469 persons were moved to 112 evacuation centers. The residents were from Calabarzon, Mimaropa, Bicol, and Eastern Visayas.Meanwhile, the DSWD report also said 189 families or 939 individuals decided to stay with relatives and friends but were still being served by the agency.So far, about P395,144 worth of aid has been provided by the DSWD to local government units. Emergency telecommunication equipment is also on standby if needed, the DSWD said.According to data from the Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical, and Astronomical Services Administration (PAGASA), the low pressure area which used to be Tropical Depression Usman dumped large volumes of rainfall in parts of Luzon and the Visayas in just two days. (READ: How much rain did Tropical Depression Usman bring?)Daet, Camarines Norte; Legazpi City, Albay; and Catarman, Northern Samar, had the most rain from Friday, December 28, to Saturday, December 29.Heavy rains prompted local officials to declare a state of calamity in Camarines Sur, Albay, and Sorsogon.Usman left the Philippine Area of Responsibility (PAR) on Sunday, but the northeast monsoon or amihan is still affecting Luzon. – with reports from Sofia Tomacruz, Agence France Presse/Rappler.com